---
title: A few moments...
date: 2026-02-04
draft: no
layout: post
---

I've enjoyed the climbing gym here very much. Good folks, Robert, Josh,
Brad, Anna, Alora, Mark, Case, JT and others. Today I tried out ice tools with
rubber paddles on them for a hint of mixed climbing in the gym. Wow --
so much fun! I burned my forearms completely.

Mark and I went for some beers at Bridger Brewery. He works on really interesting
stuff, and has a rich life. We dived into political discussion and outrageous
disagreement. I just felt that when we disagreed we were playing out a script
that an AI LLM could have unrolled. That is -- why bother? But we did it anyway,
because the beer was good. However, I loved the points where suddenly, like
a ray of sun behind clouds, we'd agree and say "yes, that is right!" But then
back into the dark clouds...

There are certain stories in the world which convey a truth without stating
it directly. They usually involve the observation of something strange, wrong
or shocking. But there is no judgment passed. The meaning of the story is
bound up in the lack of judgment.

I think the world is unspooling that story for us, and our role is not to judge.
Judgment is boring. It locks you into an interpretation. You'll be forced to
conclude, say, that millions live without conscience. Or that hope is lost.

The one who doesn't judge avoids this problem. Is he therefore a cipher,
living a shadowed or zombied life?

Maybe not. Maybe he actually lives, while the rest of us are counting chits
in a windowless room, surrounded by the heavy furniture of our prior judgments.

I am alive, and should be grateful.

Knowing I should be, I am, and will fight anyone who says I am really not.
Even if I am really not. Because to live any other way would be impolite
in the face of great gift.

I am NOT worthy, and I offer thanks feebly, and my mind is divided.

And yet I would do nothing else. Anything worth doing, is worth doing badly.

Thank you, God, for life, or rather, for You.
